Development of Critical Thinking

Abstract. The present paper gives the overview of the basic principles and
strategies for development of students’ critical thinking and reflection. Ideas of
contemporary teaching and methodology for development of critical thinking

and reflection presented in the article are implemented in teacher training pro-
grams at the Estonian Centre for Engineering Pedagogy, Tallinn University of

Technology. Analysis of the qualitative research carried out among the students
is introduced. Students evaluated strategies implemented in teaching with the
aim of developing and supporting students’ critical thinking, reflection and
metacognition.
Keywords: Critical thinking  Active learning  Reflection  Methodology  Strategies  Metacognition
1 Introduction
Engineering has never mattered more. What engineers know, how they think and what
they can do are critical resources in our society today.

According to the statement of Partnership for 21st Century Learning [1], interna-
tional education leaders have committed to fusing the 4C’s making up the learning and

innovation skills in engineering education: Creativity and Innovation, Critical Thinking
and Problem Solving, Communication, and Collaboration.
For critical thinking and problem solving, the framework of Partnership for 21st
Century Learning emphasizes the need to [1]:
• Reason effectively, using various types of reasoning (inductive, deductive, etc.) as
appropriate to the situation;
• Use systems thinking, analyzing how parts of a whole interact with each other to
produce overall outcomes in complex systems;
• Make judgments and decisions, effectively analyzing and evaluating evidence,
arguments, claims and beliefs; analyzing and evaluating major alternative points of
view; synthesizing and making connections between information and arguments;
interpreting information and drawing conclusions based on the best analysis;
reflecting critically on learning experiences and processes;

• Solve problems, solving different kinds of non-familiar problems in both conven-
tional and innovative ways; identifying and asking significant questions that clarify

The main purpose of engineering education is to provide the learning required by
students to become successful engineers or knowledge workers – technical expertise,
critical thinking, social awareness and knowledge of innovation. The combined set of
knowledge, skills and attitudes is essential for strengthening productivity,
entrepreneurship and excellence in an environment being based on technologically
complex and sustainable products, processes and systems. Thus the goal of engineering
education should be educating students who are ready to engineer, in the real world, not
only in classrooms, making them deeply knowledgeable of technical fundamentals.
These are important signposts, as the education world has long been averse
to change—in many ways we are still preparing students for a world that no longer
exists.
Contemporary engineering students must be able to set goals for their learning and
choose the most effective ways for achieving those goals, independently, with intrinsic
motivation regulating their cognitive activities from goal setting up to evaluation of
results, choosing criteria for evaluation and classification. The main aims of education
today are mastering competencies and reaching expertise, developing intellectual skills,
learning to learn, and thinking reflectively about thinking. Reflection helps teachers to
reach the level of students, to choose suitable teaching strategies and methodology,
construct knowledge and evaluate learning activities, thus reaching metacognition.
The present paper gives the overview of the basic principles and methodology for
development of critical thinking and reflection implemented in the teacher training
programs at the Estonian Centre for Engineering Pedagogy, Tallinn University of
Technology.
2 Critical Thinking and Reflection—Basis of Constructivism
According to Halpern [2] critical thinking is the use of those skills or strategies that
increase the probability of a desirable outcome, it is used to describe thinking that is
purposeful, reasoned, and goal directed. Halpern elaborates that “critical” part of
critical thinking denotes an evaluation component [2]. When we think critically, we
evaluate the outcomes for our thought processes—how good a decision is or how well
a problem has to be solved [2]. Critical thinking is also called directed thinking as it
focuses on a desired outcome [2]. Critical thinking also involves evaluation of the
thinking process—the reasoning that went into the conclusion we’ve arrived at or the
kinds of factors considered in making a final decision [3].
Different definitions for critical thinking are used: sometimes it is called analytical
thinking, logical thinking, higher level thinking, creative thinking etc. Greek word
“kritike” means evaluate, analyze, review, judge, debate. Thus critical thinking should
be analytical, creative, constructive and reflexive.

Critical thinking is open, reflexive, evaluative higher level thinking helping stu-
dents actively process new information and thus construct their own knowledge.

Development of critical thinking skills will help students to acquire creative, self-
evaluative and communication skills for building their own learning journey in lifelong

learning. From pedagogical point of view, critical thinking is active, interactive, cre-
ative and reflexive cognition.

Critical thinking helps to find personal priorities, teaches the skills of individual
responsibility, problem solving, self-control, openness to multiple ideas and solutions,
communication, active listening, and helps to see connections.
Teaching reflection may be divided into three stages:
• Goal setting, creating learning environment and positive atmosphere;
• Didactical methods for supporting reflection, workshops, active learning, portfolio,
case studies, PBL, creative and critical thinking, debates;
• Technological support, educational technology, innovation, communication,
collaboration.
Construction of knowledge is based on reflection. Self-regulation, self-orientation
and self-evaluation as interior processes are also based on reflection, and development
of these processes is always very individual. Reflexive learning could help students to
practice reflection in the study process. When our students control their cognitive
learning process and understand the function of a teacher, they develop their
metacognitive skills by taking responsibility for their own learning, by understanding
what they already know and what they need to learn; by setting goals for their learning
process and finding the most suitable ways for reaching these goals; by carrying out the
designed action plan, compiling their own learning materials; regulating their study
process and evaluating it; by analyzing the results and comparing these to their goals;
by setting plans for further development—thus they develop abilities of self-regulation,
self-evaluation and self-motivation.
3 Development of Reflection and Metacognition

Technical teachers and engineering educators should act as examples and demonstra-
tors of a thinking process in the process of cognition and learning.

The reflection may be divided into primary reflection (reflection of a student) and
secondary reflection (reflection of a teacher). Teacher should create conditions for
development of student reflection, analyzing and understanding the development of
students’ metacognitive skills, including their self-development.
Criteria for determination of the level of students’ reflective thinking may be
divided as follows:
• Activity approach—according to the development of reflexive skills a cognitive
experience is shaped for managing the cognitive learning process. The following
metacognitive skills are needed on this level: evaluating one’s knowledge (what I
know and what I need to learn), setting learning goals; designing the plan for
reaching the goals; organizing the research activities; evaluation critically the
results; analyzing individual activities in the learning process (success and failure,
what I have gained and learned, what to do differently next time etc.);

• Dialogue approach (generalized)—discussions, educational games, multiply pos-
sibilities of group work and decision making, experience of teamwork; questioning

techniques—asking and answering questions; valuing and taking account of
Development of Critical Thinking and Reflection 897

different viewpoints; determining common ideas, active listening, reaching con-
sensus; acquiring skills of open discussions, respecting each other;

• Individual approach—individual reflection, self-determination, finding the meaning
of life, value appraisal, ethical norms; evaluation of intellectual possibilities and
strengths; self-esteem, self-actualization, self-regulation.
Reflection is a universal mechanism for self-development and self-changing as a
part of students’ learning process and development.
Metacognition is developed on the basis of reflection supporting following abilities
of teachers and students:
• Planning and designing the learning process, assignments and activities;
• Analysis and self-analysis;
• Evaluation and self-evaluation;
• Selection of learning strategies.
Though most teachers strive for making critical thinking one of the primary goal of
their instruction, most of them do not realize that students must pass through the
following 6 stages of development of learning critical thinking [4]: the Unreflective
Thinker; the Challenged Thinker; the Beginning Thinker; the Practicing Thinker; the
Advanced Thinker; the Accomplished Thinker. And of course students’ intellectual
development is of essential importance.
4 Development of Critical Thinking
Didactical strategies for development of critical thinking have been designed based on
the three main stages: evocation, realization and reflection, supported by activities of
students during the learning process and multiply of different ideas.
The Basic model for developing critical thinking and effective teaching (including
planning and design) used at the Estonian Centre for Engineering Pedagogy is designed
taking account of above listed didactical strategies, and consists of following phases:
• Evocation and involvement—goal setting, evoking interest, motivation, refreshing

prerequisite knowledge, creating associations of real world implementation, sys-
tematization of knowledge, activating of students, demonstrations, videos etc.;

• Learning and research—teaching and learning new information, rethinking and
creating connections, design, research, practical lessons and labs, testing, multiple
possible solutions, implementing active learning structures (including reading and
writing for development of critical thinking, group work, writing keywords, active
reading, questioning, etc.) supported by e-learning materials (depending on the
content the flipped classroom may be used);
• Analysis and explanation—analyzing the results, deep understanding, collaborative
teamwork, discussions, organizing the material, graphical presentation of material,
mind maps etc., questioning (using what if? questions), learning from mistakes,
finding solutions, giving feedback, communication;


• Development—modelling and building prototypes, testing, improvement, imple-
mentation the results of previous phases in new real life situations, creation,

building connections between STEM and real life situations;
• Evaluation and reflection—processing, evaluation, analyzing, integrating, and
reflecting, formulating goals for further independent learning, selection of learning
strategies and methods for independent work, self-analysis, self-regulation, and
analysis of acquisition of learning outcomes.
The aim of these didactical strategies of the described Basic model is to develop

students’ metacognitive skills and intellectual knowledge needed not only in the pro-
cess of learning but also in everyday life; to teach students how to use specialty

literature and knowledge information bases, find and implement new information, use it
in real world situations, integrate it with the knowledge already acquired and analyzed,
reproduce the knowledge and solve problems. It is important to know facts, concepts,
theory—as all skills are based on acquired specialty knowledge, and competencies in
turn are based on knowledge, skills and values (students have to know what, know
how, and know why).
The Basic model assists teachers to design a logical and effective teaching process
and support the development of critical thinking skills within contemporary teaching
and learning, using strategies for development of critical thinking and reflection as
essential tools.
5 Strategies for Development of Critical Thinking
and Reflection
Inherent in any inductive teaching method and active learning method is that students
actually have to do something, but the central aim of active learning is to give students
possibilities to explore new concepts, solve problems, and reflect on their experiences,
in order to improve their performance in the iterative cycle [9]. Thus a learning activity

is appropriate if it supports students’ analysis and reflective practice, the key compo-
nent should be feedback and self-analysis.

Strategies for development of critical thinking from the pedagogical point of view
teach students the following skills:
• Active reading skills, collection of information and analysis the quality of data;
• Analysis of learning situation in general, seeing the “big picture”;
• Identifying and defining of a problem, clarifying the cause and effect, drawing
logical conclusions;
• Designing individual opinion, finding alternatives and connections;
• Self-analysis, self-evaluation, feedback, and reflection.
Strategies for teaching critical thinking and reflection used at the ECEP are:
• Collaborative group work—for learning with deep understanding students must
critically analyze their own views, make presentations, participate in brainstorming,
analyze other students’ views, work out the best solutions [3];

Development of Critical Thinking and Reflection 899

• Muddy cards [5]—finding the “muddiest” point of the lecture—students give

feedback to analyze, increase learning retention and determine gaps in their com-
prehension—students are asked to reflect what they have learned—they write down

the most unclear points of the lecture. The instructor may correct misconceptions by
the next class or use the cards in seminars;
• Peer instruction—interactive teaching strategy promoted by Harvard Professor Eric
Mazur [6, 7] it is a form of a flipped classroom and provides a structured way to
guide student preparation, in-class active learning and rich feedback/analysis
opportunities. The peer instruction cycle is implemented in following five steps:
– A problem with multiple choice answers is displayed, students are given time to
think over;
– Students record their answers, using flash cards, rising hands, or electronic
response system;
– When there is a disagreement in the group, students are given a few minutes to
convince their neighbors (peer instruction) of their choice. Students think
individually and practice to express their views;
– Students record their revised answers;
– The instructor leads a discussion on ways of reasoning and arguing in relation to
the problem.
• Quizzes for reflection—may be used in the beginning of a lecture to help students to
recapitulate a previous lecture. This method was developed at Chalmers University

of Technology for enhancing student active reflection [8]. It is related to peer-
instruction and uses six multiple-choice questions that students discuss with peers at

the beginning of the lecture. The instructor concludes by explaining why each
choice is correct or incorrect [9];
• Visual diagrams—Mind map, Fishbone diagram, Venn’s diagram, etc. These
methods help to develop students’ analytical and critical thinking abilities and
reflection;

• Student-led recitations (Ticking)—appropriate for using in teaching problem solv-
ing, first used at Royal Institute of Technology (KTH) in Stockholm [9]. For weekly

recitation sessions students are asked to work through a set of problems. At session
students tick on the list which problems they are prepared to present, solve, explain,
and lead the classroom discussion. Students need to tick for at least 75% of
problems in order to past the course. Students spend time on task, are active, reflect
on how to explain the methods and argue on problem-solving strategies;
• Project-based learning—experiential learning method, solving real world problems
or situations ending with some kind of a real result—documentation, drawings,
video report, model, prototype, written report etc.;
• Simulations—instructor’s role is to explain rules, the situation and the role of
students, to monitor, to help students to reflect on the experience, to lead a
debriefing session;
• Case studies—giving real engineering experiences, case discussions develop
independent thinking, decision-making skills, analytic and problem-solving skills
through practice and reflection;
900 T. Rüütmann

• Journals and portfolios—perfect methods for self-evaluation, self-analysis, reflec-
tion, develop critical thinking skills, reasoning skills, recording and analyzing the

steps of an engineering design process;
• Problem-based learning—different methods may be used, for example IDEAL
method (I-Identify the problem, D-Define and represent the problem, E-Explore
possible strategies or solutions, A-Act on a selected strategy or solution, L-Look
back and evaluate) or CDIO method (Conceive—Design—Implement—Operate);
• Compilation of test questions (Blooming questions)—students are asked to compile
questions for a test/assignment/seminar based on the new material according to
Bloom taxonomy levels (questions for the levels of remembering, understanding,
implementation, analysis, evaluation and creation). Questions may be used for
home assignments, tests, group works at seminars etc.;
• INSERT method (Interactive Noting System Effective Reading and Thinking)—
founded by Vogan and Estes [10] developing critical thinking ability in reading
scientific texts. This method visualizes the process of knowledge accumulation from

known information to the new one. Student can mark text or information as fol-
lowing: “?”—already know, “+”—new information, “–“- had another idea, “?”—

unclear, and needs to be clarified.
All active learning strategies for developing of critical thinking and reflection

presented above have been implemented at the Estonian Centre for Engineering Ped-
agogy (ECEP) within the Basic model presented hereinbefore.

7 Discussion and Further Developments
According to Robert Ennis [11] Critical thinking is a reasonable and reflective thinking
focused on deciding what to believe or do.
Critical thinking assumes the understanding that everyone could make mistakes.
Critical thinking assist in asking higher level questions (what if? why?), finding the
pros and cons, in argumentation, self-evaluation, and self-critique.
The basic elements of critical thinking are: identification of a topic or a problem,
finding connections, collecting information and critical analysis, situation analysis,
logical conclusions, cause and effect analysis, combination, integration, modelling and
defending one’s views.

Table 1. Students‘comments on used teaching strategies

No Students’ comments
1 Collaborative group work helped more easily to understand difficult concepts and the
process of decision making
2 I liked Muddy cards the most—sometimes it is not easy to ask questions in the large
classroom, but when i wrote down the problems i did not understand, professor started
with these problems on the next lecture and i understood everything
3 Please use more Peer instruction, i worked with high responsibility, i like flipped
classroom
4 Quizzes for reflection was a good strategy, thus material passed in the last lecture was
revised at the beginning of the next lecture and it helped to understand better and see
connections
5 Visual diagrams helped to realize and analyze the problem, it became more clearer, i
liked Venn’s diagram the most, it was fun
6 Ticking is the best—i received bonus for my comprehension and it was good to solve
problems in teams, holding discussions and arguing, it was fun and motivating, but still
a hard work
7 Project-based learning has been used for a long time in engineering, but it still works,
especially with real life tasks, i liked the video report presentations at the final seminar
and the discussion
8 I liked the case studies most, at first we tried to solve the case, and then professor
showed us how the problem was solved in a real life situation
9 At first i did not like the portfolio compilation, but afterwards i understood how it
helped me to cope with self-analysis, reflection and metacognition—i started to think
how to learn and work better in the future and learned from my mistakes
10 Problem-based learning—the problems were so interesting that we worked together for
several hours, professor helped as a professional mentor and engineer
11 Using Blooming questions was motivating, especially because the professor used our
questions at the tests and discussions
12 I have never understood the text so well before—using INSERT helped with supporting
deeper understanding
13 I liked CDIO the best, it was like a real engineering process and we worked as a real
team

Development of Critical Thinking and Reflection

For teaching and developing critical thinking abilities, the following principles
outlined by Ennis [11] have been taken account of at the ECEP in teaching engineering:
• Care that beliefs are true, and that decisions are justified; that is, care to “get it right”
to the extent possible; including to [11]:
– Seek alternative hypotheses, explanations, conclusions, plans, sources, etc.; and
be open to them;
– Consider seriously other points of view than their own;
– Try to be well informed;
– Endorse a position to the extent that, but only to the extent that, it is justified by
the information that is available;
– Use critical thinking abilities;
• Care to understand and present a position honestly and clearly, theirs as well as
others’ including to [11]:
– Discover and listen to others’ view and reasons;
– Be clear about the intended meaning of what is said, written, or otherwise
communicated, seeking as much precision as the situation requires;
– Determine, and maintain focus on, the conclusion or question;
– Seek and offer reasons;
– Take into account the total situation;
– Be reflectively aware of their own basic beliefs;
• Care about every person. Caring critical thinkers [11]:
– Avoid intimidating or confusing others with their critical thinking prowess,
taking into account others’ feelings and level of understanding;
– Are concerned about others’ welfare.
In order to learn how to think critically, students have to focus on a problem or a
question, analyze arguments, ask multiple clarifying questions, judge the credibility of
a source analyzing every step, asking questions (what if? why?), being prepared for
argumentation, feedback and other opinions, paying attention to self-control and
respect.
How to help students to develop their critical thinking skills? The following set of
recommended principles has been compiled for the teaching staff of the ECEP: the
teaching material should be based on main concepts and generalizations; think about
how to make students to think along; take account of students’ preliminary knowledge;
ask higher level questions (Why you think so? What may be alternatives? What if?

What conclusions could be made? Why?); visualize students’ argumentation; let stu-
dents explain what they understood and what needs clarification; let them describe how

the system and its elements function, are connected and influence each other; let them
describe how they reached the solution; ask them to explain the concepts or problems
in their own words; use peer instruction; analyze scientific articles; let them design a
product according to given specification; ask them to check the solution and find
mistakes; find multiple solutions; ask to integrate new details to a product; analyze the
results of a research; analyze conclusions and find relevant data moving in reverse
direction of a research; ask them to argue on superstitions related to your subject/topic;
904 T. Rüütmann

write the list of criteria according to which the quality of a product may be evaluated;
think aloud and ask your students also to think aloud; use 1- sentence summary method
at the end of a lesson; be consistent and patient—teaching and supporting critical
thinking is a time consuming process and you will see the results step by step.
The main strategies for teaching critical thinking are:
• Affective strategies—developing of independent thinking—What do you think?
How you reached this decision? What are the other opinions?
• Cognitive strategies—processes related to knowledge and thinking—Why? What?
What is the problem? What we have to solve?

• Analytical strategies—analysis, higher level questioning, logical thinking and dis-
cussions—What if? What will happen next? What may be the reason? What may be

the consequences?
According to Brent and Felder [12] in order to help the talented and motivated
students become much better at creative and critical thinking than they were at the
beginning of the course teachers should show them examples of the kind of thinking
teachers have in mind themselves; ask students to complete tasks that require that kind
of thinking in class and in assignments; give them feedback; and repeat.

Thinking is an active process. Thus inductive teaching and active learning struc-
tures may be used with the aim of teaching critical thinking. Critical thinking must

always be reflective and evaluative. This is the reason why all active learning strategies
will have to be concluded with conclusion, reflective analysis and self-evaluation.
Reflection assists learning from experiences.
Development and teaching of critical thinking is more effective in theoretical than
in practical classes. It is recommended to develop critical thinking through a social
experiences, collaborative learning and communication, using scaffolding, supporting
and encouraging thinking.
Further developments include the research of the instructors’ opinions on the

implemented strategies but also providing support for continuing to incorporate ana-
lyzed strategies in the teacher training courses. After the research at TTU the results

will be analyzed and published informing about how these strategies could be imple-
mented elsewhere or how they might otherwise be applied at other universities.

8 Conclusions
The aim of contemporary engineering education is to educate future engineers. They
will have to solve future engineering problems. What to teach them so they could cope
with their job in the future? It is a difficult question and we do not have the answers
today—we know nothing about the future problems. We should teach our students how
to solve today’s problems, how to think critically, find correct and relevant information,
evaluate their decisions and to continue learning through their whole life. Critical
thinking is the central pile of the development and success.

Development of Critical Thinking and Reflection

The key person in teaching critical thinking is a teacher who should plan assign-
ments that make students think critically, taking account of strategies of critical

thinking and students’ preliminary knowledge. Let them learn from their own mistakes,
let them analyze these mistakes, and let them find a better way.